README.md, before:


# BattleshipCLI

Welcome to BattleshipCLI, the fully terminal based implementation of the classic Battleships, you can play the game on the web deployment in your browser, which at least works on Chrome. You can also run the game locally by downloadin the run.py file and running it with Python (should be compatible with any 3.x version, developed and tested with 3.11.7)

[Click here to play!](https://krnils-app-b3ee567503b8.herokuapp.com)

## Introduction

BattleshipCLI is a web application that lets users enjoy a chance-based, single-user game against the computer online. BattleshipCLI is based on the classic board game (or pen and paper game) mostly known as Battleships (The first iteration was called something else: [See Wikipedia for the fascinating history](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battleship_(game))).

Game flow:

* The user picks how big of a game board they want and the amount of ships for each player.
* For the rest of the game the player uses the keyboard controlled cursor to select positions on the board. The cursor is controlled 
* The user selects where on the board they want their ships.
* The player picks a position on the computer's side of the board to attack, if a ship is hit it will be displayed as an 'X', if no ship is hit that position will be marked with a '0'.
* After the player's turn is finished the computer's turn is simulated and a position on the player's side of the board is picked at random, similar to the player's turn the players ships are changed into the 'X' symbol if they are hit.
* This is repeated until all ships on any side has been hit.
* If at any time all of the ships on any side has been hit the game ends and the winner is decided and a victory or loss message is displayed to the player depending on if they won or lost the game.
* The player is offered to play again. If they choose to play again the game starts over from the game size selection step.

## Flowchart

![Flowchart, made with Whimsical, see credits](readme/battleship_flow_chart.png)
Click for full size

## Features

* Battleship game playable against the computer in a terminal.
* Consistent and frequently updating terminal screen for intuitive display and clear visual feedback on the game status.
* Variable size game board to allow for different styles of game, selected by the player at the start. The game board can be any square from 3x3 to 10x10.
* Variable amount of ships per game, the player chooses how many ships there should be, it's possible to fill the entire board with ships or have just one per side (1 to 100 ships)!
* The board is split into two parts by a dividing line, the upper half holds the computer's ships which are invisible to the player until hit. The lower half is the player's side where they can place their ships. The players ships are shown with a '§' symbol.

### Existing Features

- __Manual ship placement with terminal cursor__

- Move the cursor with the arrow keys on the keyboard
- Place ships by pressing the space or enter key
- The cursor can't be moved outside the game board

![screenshot 1](readme/place_ships.png)

- __Manual attack position selection with terminal cursor__

- Move the cursor with the arrow keys on the keyboard
- Select positions to attack by pressing enter or space
- The cursor can't be moved outside the game board

![screenshot 2](readme/play_game.png)

### Future Features

* Ships longer than one tile
* Limited ability to put a radar beacon instead of shooting, maybe two shots per game or with cooldown. It would show the distance to nearest ship from one point on the board, making the game more interesting.
* AI that can act on above two features intelligently. Maybe an easy mode where it makes mistakes.
* Two player mode.


## Testing

* All Python code has been continuously checked with the Flake8 linter (I hate red and yellow squiggly lines). No problems are left in the latest version of the code.
* Validation for all types of input has been manually tested. The user has an opportunity to put in weird things during the board size and ship count selection steps. These are handled sensibly and the user is warned and prompted to try again if they input text or numbers that are out of bounds.
* During the main gameplay the user is prevented from moving the cursor out of bounds by the code and if they try to put a ship were one already exists nothing happens, if they try to fire on a position that has already been fired on (either with a hit ship 'X' or a '0') they get a message that the position has already been hit and they need to choose another one.

### Solved Bugs

* Running the game locally worked without problems but when deployed to Heroku there was an exception thrown from curses from the curses.set_curs() function. The issue stems from the terminal emulator (xterm) not supporting different kinds of cursor visibility. To work around this issue all uses of that function was removed since it's not crucial for the game to work.

### Known Bugs

* Sometimes there will be a briefly visible terminal cursor in places where they should not be in the middle of game play, such as just outside the bottom right corner of the board or following any status update text. This is caused by the screen frequently updating and sometimes showing the cursor when it's used by the program to input characters, this was previously avoided by using curses.set_curs() to make the cursor invisible when not controlled by the user. Turn out this function does not work on the xterm terminal.

## Deployment

- The game was deployed on [Heroku](http://www.heroku.com/). Here's how to deploy on Heroku:
    - Make sure the code is hosted on github.
    - Create a Heroku account and/or log in.
    - Click New and select Create new app.
    - Select a region and a unique name for the app. Click Create App.
    - Some projects require special hidden files like credentials to be added or need options added to Config Vars. This project only has one Config Vars setting added required for the Code Institue Terminal emulator.
    - Next add the required Buildpacks by scrolling down and selecting them from the dropdown, this project used Python and Nodejs to make the terminal work.
    - Next go click Deploy from the navigation menu.
    - Select a deployment method such as Githuh, like this project.
    - Select the repository to connect to from the next menu.
    - Further down is the deploy button where you can select to deply automatically or only deploy when you click the deploy button.
    - Click the deploy button and wait for the build to finish.


The live link can be found here - https://krnils-app-b3ee567503b8.herokuapp.com

## Credits

### Content

- The game itself is based on the old board game: [Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battleship_(game)).
- Some of the ideas for the game is based on the Code Institue sample project [found here](https://p3-battleships.herokuapp.com/)

### Code

These resources were used to make the project. All Python code is written from scratch but has taken some inspiration or guidance from the below sources.

- The code for the Terminal emulator is provided entirely by Code Institute from [this template](https://github.com/Code-Institute-Org/python-essentials-template)
- Some coding solutions were inspired by the Code Institute [Love Sandwhiches](https://github.com/Code-Institute-Solutions/love-sandwiches-p5-sourcecode/tree/master/05-deployment/01-deployment-part-1) project 
- [The curses package](https://docs.python.org/3/library/curses.html), from the standard Python library, was used extensively. This enables the screen to update consistently and input to be done with a terminal cursor.
- The how to document at https://docs.python.org/3/howto/curses.html, was the main source for coding help.
- [This Stackoverflow Entry](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2058925/how-can-i-break-up-this-long-line-in-python) For suggestions on how to break up lines within long strings inside Python code.

### Tools

- [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) The IDE I used for 100% of code writing and majority of README writing.
- [http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc](http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc) table of contents generated with markdown-toc 
- I used [https://whimsical.com/](https://whimsical.com/) for the flowchart, really easy to use flowchart (and other things) tool.
- Microsofts [Flake8 linter VSCode Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.flake8) was used throughout development to ensure PEP8 compliance.

Commit message:

Updated README.md formatting + added validation feature screenshot

README.md, after:


# BattleshipCLI

Welcome to BattleshipCLI, the fully terminal based implementation of the classic Battleships, you can play the game on the web deployment in your browser, which at least works on Chrome. You can also run the game locally by downloadin the run.py file and running it with Python (should be compatible with any 3.x version, developed and tested with 3.11.7)

[Click here to play!](https://krnils-app-b3ee567503b8.herokuapp.com)

## Introduction

BattleshipCLI is a web application that lets users enjoy a chance-based, single-user game against the computer online. BattleshipCLI is based on the classic board game (or pen and paper game) mostly known as Battleships (The first iteration was called something else: [See Wikipedia for the fascinating history](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battleship_(game))).

Game flow:

* The user picks how big of a game board they want and the amount of ships for each player.
* For the rest of the game the player uses the keyboard controlled cursor to select positions on the board. The cursor is controlled 
* The user selects where on the board they want their ships.
* The player picks a position on the computer's side of the board to attack, if a ship is hit it will be displayed as an 'X', if no ship is hit that position will be marked with a '0'.
* After the player's turn is finished the computer's turn is simulated and a position on the player's side of the board is picked at random, similar to the player's turn the players ships are changed into the 'X' symbol if they are hit.
* This is repeated until all ships on any side has been hit.
* If at any time all of the ships on any side has been hit the game ends and the winner is decided and a victory or loss message is displayed to the player depending on if they won or lost the game.
* The player is offered to play again. If they choose to play again the game starts over from the game size selection step.

## Flowchart

![Flowchart, made with Whimsical, see credits](readme/battleship_flow_chart.png)
Click for full size

## Features

* Battleship game playable against the computer in a terminal.
* Consistent and frequently updating terminal screen for intuitive display and clear visual feedback on the game status.
* Variable size game board to allow for different styles of game, selected by the player at the start. The game board can be any square from 3x3 to 10x10.
* Variable amount of ships per game, the player chooses how many ships there should be, it's possible to fill the entire board with ships or have just one per side (1 to 100 ships)!
* The board is split into two parts by a dividing line, the upper half holds the computer's ships which are invisible to the player until hit. The lower half is the player's side where they can place their ships. The players ships are shown with a '§' symbol.

### Existing Features

__Data Validation__

- Board size is validated so that too large or too small numbers are not accepted.
- 

![screenshot 2](readme/validation.png)

__Manual ship placement with terminal cursor__

- Move the cursor with the arrow keys on the keyboard
- Place ships by pressing the space or enter key
- The cursor can't be moved outside the game board

![screenshot 2](readme/place_ships.png)

__Manual attack position selection with terminal cursor__

- Move the cursor with the arrow keys on the keyboard
- Select positions to attack by pressing enter or space
- The cursor can't be moved outside the game board

![screenshot 3](readme/play_game.png)

### Future Features

* Ships longer than one tile
* Limited ability to put a radar beacon instead of shooting, maybe two shots per game or with cooldown. It would show the distance to nearest ship from one point on the board, making the game more interesting.
* AI that can act on above two features intelligently. Maybe an easy mode where it makes mistakes.
* Two player mode.

## Data Model

The game board is modeled on the board from the classic board game and consists of a "Board" data type created for the game, the Board data type takes a size and ship count as arguments on creation and in the __init__ function it

## Testing

* All Python code has been continuously checked with the Flake8 linter (I hate red and yellow squiggly lines). No problems are left in the latest version of the code.
* Validation for all types of input has been manually tested. The user has an opportunity to put in weird things during the board size and ship count selection steps. These are handled sensibly and the user is warned and prompted to try again if they input text or numbers that are out of bounds.
* During the main gameplay the user is prevented from moving the cursor out of bounds by the code and if they try to put a ship were one already exists nothing happens, if they try to fire on a position that has already been fired on (either with a hit ship 'X' or a '0') they get a message that the position has already been hit and they need to choose another one.

### Solved Bugs

* Running the game locally worked without problems but when deployed to Heroku there was an exception thrown from curses from the curses.set_curs() function. The issue stems from the terminal emulator (xterm) not supporting different kinds of cursor visibility. To work around this issue all uses of that function was removed since it's not crucial for the game to work.

### Known Bugs

* Sometimes there will be a briefly visible terminal cursor in places where they should not be in the middle of game play, such as just outside the bottom right corner of the board or following any status update text. This is caused by the screen frequently updating and sometimes showing the cursor when it's used by the program to input characters, this was previously avoided by using curses.set_curs() to make the cursor invisible when not controlled by the user. Turns out this function does not work on the xterm terminal.

## Deployment

- The game was deployed on [Heroku](http://www.heroku.com/). Here's how to deploy on Heroku:
    - Make sure the code is hosted on github.
    - Create a Heroku account and/or log in.
    - Click New and select Create new app.
    - Select a region and a unique name for the app. Click Create App.
    - Some projects require special hidden files like credentials to be added or need options added to Config Vars. This project only has one Config Vars setting added required for the Code Institue Terminal emulator.
    - Next add the required Buildpacks by scrolling down and selecting them from the dropdown, this project used Python and Nodejs to make the terminal work.
    - Next go click Deploy from the navigation menu.
    - Select a deployment method such as Githuh, like this project.
    - Select the repository to connect to from the next menu.
    - Further down is the deploy button where you can select to deply automatically or only deploy when you click the deploy button.
    - Click the deploy button and wait for the build to finish.


The live link can be found here - https://krnils-app-b3ee567503b8.herokuapp.com

## Credits

### Content

- The game itself is based on the old board game: [Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battleship_(game)).
- Some of the ideas for the game is based on the Code Institue sample project [found here](https://p3-battleships.herokuapp.com/)

### Code

These resources were used to make the project. All Python code is written from scratch but has taken some inspiration or guidance from the below sources.

- The code for the Terminal emulator is provided entirely by Code Institute from [this template](https://github.com/Code-Institute-Org/python-essentials-template)
- Some coding solutions were inspired by the Code Institute [Love Sandwhiches](https://github.com/Code-Institute-Solutions/love-sandwiches-p5-sourcecode/tree/master/05-deployment/01-deployment-part-1) project 
- [The curses package](https://docs.python.org/3/library/curses.html), from the standard Python library, was used extensively. This enables the screen to update consistently and input to be done with a terminal cursor.
- The how to document at https://docs.python.org/3/howto/curses.html, was the main source for coding help.
- [This Stackoverflow Entry](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2058925/how-can-i-break-up-this-long-line-in-python) For suggestions on how to break up lines within long strings inside Python code.

### Tools

- [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) The IDE I used for 100% of code writing and majority of README writing.
- [http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc](http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc) table of contents generated with markdown-toc 
- I used [https://whimsical.com/](https://whimsical.com/) for the flowchart, really easy to use flowchart (and other things) tool.
- Microsofts [Flake8 linter VSCode Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.flake8) was used throughout development to ensure PEP8 compliance.
